 Once upon a time there  was a husband and wife  with children."The mother prepared food for the family each day.
She would bring the meal to the table for them to eat.""The father would divide the meat. He would say to the eldest child, ""I am old enough for meat. Here is yours. Wait until you are older.""""Then he would say to the
next child, ""Iam old
enough for meat. Here is
yours. Wait until you are
older.""""Each small portion
became even smaller. It
went like this for all the
children. The youngest
child got a tiny piece of
meat.""The father kept the big
pieces of meat for himself
and his wife. The children
were quiet and ate their
food.""Years passed and the
children grew up. The
parents grew old. They
became weak. The
children looked after their
old mother and father.""One day at meal time, the
eldest child served the
meat, as usual. But this
time she gave only a tiny
piece to her father and a
tiny piece to her mother.""She said to her parents,
""You ate yours, now it is
our time. We are old
enough.""

""She served most of the
meat to her brothers and
sisters.""The father remembered
what he did while his
children were young.
Mother and father agreed
that it was not the right
thing to do.""They asked for
forgiveness. The children
promised that they would
not repeat this mistake
with their own children."I saw a big truck  driving down the road."A car came driving
up the road.""The truck driver
was talking on his
cellphone.""He was not looking
at the road.""An ambulance and
the police came to rescue""Two tow trucks
came. They towed
the truck and the
car.""Namu and her
brother are ready
for school.""Namu carries her
brother on her
bicycle."Their friends cheer for them as they ride into school."While they are in
the classroom, a
monkey arrives
outside. The
monkey rides away
on Namu's bicycle!""The children chase
the monkey.""The monkey leaves
the bicycle under a
tree.""The monkey swims
to an island in the
middle of the lake.
He climbs high into
a tree.""The monkey waves
goodbye! The
children wave
back. Namu has
her bicycle again.""Ben and Thabo are
two hungry boys.""Granny is making
ten cupcakes. She
puts them ona

plate."Ben takesone cupcake. Thabo takes  two cupcakes.Ben takes four cupcakes. Thabo takes two cupcakes."How many
cupcakes did Ben
eat? How many
cupcakes did
Thabo eat? How
many cupcakes are
left for granny?""One day, mother was
cooking. She called,
""Abena, Ajua, Akwasi, Aku,
food is ready! Bring your
plates!""

Mother gave each of them
some fufu. She gave them
some soup. Then she gave
them some meat. She said
to them, ""Go and sit down
and eat.""""Aku looked at her fufu. She
looked at her soup. Then
she looked at her meat.
She put her plate down
angrily and cried. Mother
asked, ""Aku, what is wrong
with you?""

""My meat is the smallest,""
Aku cried. ""But you are the
youngest,"" mother said.""Aku cried harder. She
threw herself on the
ground. Mother did not
want Aku to cry. She called
loudly, ""Abena, Ajua,
Akwasi, bring your food
quickly!""

The children brought their
food. ""Now Aku, pick the
meat you like,"" mother
said.""Aku smiled happily. She
looked hard at Akwasi's
meat and thought,
""Akwasi's meat is big.""

She looked hard at Ajua's
meat, and thought, ""Ajua's
meat is bigger.""

She looked hard at
Abena's meat. Abena's
meat was the biggest. She
said to mother, ""I want
Abena's meat.""""""Abena, give your meat to
Aku and take hers,""
mother said. Abena was
unhappy. But she did not
want to disobey mother.
So she gave her meat to
Aku.""Pii! Pii! It was the ice cream
man outside. He rode a
big bicycle with a small
horn.

Aku loved ice cream.
""Abena, get my bag,""
mother said. ""I want to
buy ice cream for all of
you."" Abena brought
mother's bag.""""Four ice creams, please,""
mother said to the ice
cream man. She paid and
gave each child an ice
cream.

""One, two, three, four,""
counted Aku. She looked
at her ice cream. It was
small. She looked hard at
Akwasi's ice cream. It was
smaller than hers.""She looked harder at
Ajua's ice cream. It was the
smallest of all. She was
happy. ""My ice cream is
the biggest,"" she thought.

""Wait,"" she thought. ""I
must see Abena's ice
cream too."" She moved
closer to Abena. Then she
opened her mouth wide
and cried.""""What is the matter, Aku?""
mother asked.

""Abena's ice cream is
bigger than mine,"" she
cried. Mother said, ""Aku
you are a greedy girl!""

Aku cried harder. She
threw herself on the
ground. Mother was
unhappy. She did not want
Aku to cry.""Mother said to Abena,
""Please give your ice
cream to Aku and take
hers.""

Abena was unhappy, but
she did not want to
disobey mother. She gave
the ice cream to Aku. Aku's
eyes shone with
happiness. She looked at
the big ice cream and
smiled.""""Mmmm, this ice cream
looks good,"" said Aku. She
opened her mouth wide
and took a big bite.

""Ajiish!"" she shouted
suddenly and spat out the
ice cream.

""What is the matter now?""
mother asked. This ice
cream is bitter,"" wailed
Aku.""Mother took Aku's ice
cream and bit into it. She
frowned. ""There is
something wrong with
this. It is spoilt,"" she said.

Then mother added,
""Sorry Aku, you cannot
have another one. Now do
you see that it is bad to be
greedy?""""Ogres are
stupid""There was a
drought. Mulongo’s
 family had no food.
""One day, Mulongo led them into the forest for food.""They found a
banana plantation
but there was no
owner.""Suddenly, a big
ogre arrived!

He let them stay.""Then one morning
he said, “Cook your
son for me.”""In the evening, the
ogre said, “Cook
your daughter
tomorrow.”""The parents hid
their daughter in a
tree.""
The ogre said,
“Tomorrow you
must cook your
husband.""""That evening, the
ogre asked the wife
to cook herself!""After eating, the
ogre lay under the
tree snoring.""The ogre saw all of
them alive.

He was angry.""They tricked the
ogre and came
down from the
tree."LettersLast week I received a lot of letters."On Monday my
doctor wrote a
letter to my
teacher.""This is how the letter read: ""Thabisile is sick.
She must stay at
home.""""On Tuesday I got a
letter from my
class.""Get well soon
Thabisile!""On Wednesday I
got a letter from
my best friend.""I drew this picture
for you. Love from
Dudu.""On Thursday I got
a letter from my
mother."Weather bookIt is dry.The sun is hot.It is windy.It is cloudy.It is cold.It is raining.There is thunder.I see a rainbow.Houses"Mzi lives in a
thatched house.""Thulani lives in a
Square house.""This house is a
rectangle.""The roof of this
house is a triangle.""This man is
building his own
house."This house is new.This house is old.I wish I lived in this house."Anansi, the
Crows, and the

Crocodiles""One day there was a great famine in
the land. No one had anything to eat
except the crows. Each morning they
flew a long distance to where there
was d tree with ripe figs in the middle
of a wide river. Then they flew back
with the figs for themselves and their
relatives. The sight of so many figs
made Anansi's mouth water. How
could he get them for himself?""He thought of a plan. He carefully
covered his bottom with sticky
beeswax. Then he took a piece of clay
pot and went to see the crows. ""Please
could you help me?"" he asked. ""I need
a live coal to get my fire going again.""
As they were getting the coal from the
fire, Anansi carefully sat firmly on one
of the largest figs, so that it would stick
to his bottom. He thanked the crows,
and hurried home to enjoy the fig.""But one fig wasn't enough for him. He
went back a second time, and did the
same. When he went back a third time,
the crows began to get suspicious.
""Why do you keep coming back to us
to get a coal?"" they said. Anansi
answered, ""Every time when I get
home, the coal has burnt out."" ""You're
lying!"" said the crows. ""You just want
our food!"" ""That's not true,"" said
Anansi. And he started crying.""""The crows felt sorry for him. The next
morning at first light, each crow gave
him a feather. He flew with them to
the fig tree in the middle of the wide
river. When he saw the luscious figs,
Anansi wanted them all for himself.
Each time a crow tried to pick a fig, he
shouted out, """"That one is mine! I saw it
first!"""" And then he took the fig and put
it into his bag. Eventually he had all
the figs and the crows had none.""""He was left all alone as the darkness
began to fall. ""If I don't want to stay in
this tree for the rest of my life,"" he said
to himself, ""I'll just have to jump into
the air like the crows."" So he took a
deep breath, jumped, andPLOP! He fell
into the river right among the
crocodiles.""""What do we have here?"" said a gruff
crocodile voice. ""A tasty morsel to eat,
nyum"" ""Oh please don't,"" said Anansi.
And he began to cry. ""I'm one of you,
don't you know? I got lost in the days
of your grandfathers and no one was
able to find me. You're the first of my
relatives I've ever met!"" He cried so
much that the crocodiles felt sorry for
him.""The oldest crocodile said, ""We'll know
you're one of us if you can eat and
enjoy mud soup just like we do."" They
gave him a pot of dirty brown water.
""Just like my grandmother used to
make it!"" Anansi said. But he made a
hole in the ground with his back foot,
and a hole in the pot with his front
foot. As he pretended to drink the
soup, it oozed down through the pot
into the hole beneath his feet.""""Delicious!"" he exclaimed, giving back
the empty pot. ""Now we know you are
definitely one of us,"" the crocodiles
said. So they allowed Anansi to sleep in
their hole with them for the night.
""Tomorrow morning I'll tell you the
story of my life,"" said Anansi as they
fell asleep.""Early the next morning, before first
light, Anansi woke up one of the
crocodiles. ""I want to go and fetch my
wife and children from across the river,
so that they can help me tell my story.
Will you help me before the others
wake up?"" he asked the crocodile.""The crocodile was grumpy at being
woken up so early. ""Please help me!
You swim much faster than I do,""
Anansi said. The crocodile agreed, and
Anansi rode on his back to the bank of
the river. He climbed off quickly. ""I'll be
back soon! Don't go away!"" Anansi
said, as he disappeared through the
grass.""As far as we know, the crocodile is
waiting for him still, with just his long
snout and his beady eyes above the
surface of the river."Anansi gives people stories"Long, long ago, the Sky God, Nyame, Kept all stories locked in a wooden box, high in the sky kept all stories locked in a wooden  box"People down on earth had no stories to tell and they were very sad.They asked Anansi the clever to help them."Anansi spun a long thread, and climbed up his sticky thread all the way to heaven. """"Can I have the stories,please?"" he asked the Sky God. ""But Nyame laughed at Anansi and said, ""Oh, these are very expensive stories. You wouldn't be able to pay for them, little spider.""""""How much do the stories cost?"" asked Anansi. """"A leopard with sharp teeth like spears, a hornet that stings people, and a snake that swallows people whole.""""""You'll have to bring me three rare and fierce animals,"" Nyame answered, " He laughed and laughed. He thought his stories were quite safe.So Anansi climbed slowly back down his sticky thread to the earth."He thought and he thought, and he came up with a plan.""He dug a deep hole,covered it with branches and dirt so it was hidden, and he went home for supper. ""In the morning, sure enough,a leopard had fallen into his pit. ""He was furiously scratching at the side of the pit, but he couldn't get out.""Oh let me help you, my dear friend!"" said Anansi."" ""Just lie down on these sticks and I'll pull you out."""" Anansi wound his sticky web round the leopard and the sticks, and pulled him up to heaven to show the Sky God""But Nyame just laughed and said, ""Where are the other two?"""So Anansi went back down to earth to get the second creature. He thought and he thought and he came up with a plan. He took a gourd full of water and went to the tree where the hornets livedHe poured out some of the water all over their nest. "Then he cut a leaf from a banana tree and held it over his head, and he poured the rest of the water all over himself.""He called out to the hornets, ""Hey hornets! Come see! It is raining! Quick get inside my gourd and it will keep all of you dry."" ""Hornets don't like to get wet, so they all flew into Anansi's gourd."Then Anansi quickly spun a web across the opening so the hornets couldn't get out no matter how much they buzzedHe carried them up to heaven and showed them to the Sky God. "But Nyame just said, ""Where's the last one?"" (He wasn't laughing so much anymore"So Anansi went down to earth again."He thought and thought and he thought, but he couldn't come up with a plan.""So he asked his wife, who had a very good idea. "Together they found a good long thick branch and some strong vines."When they got near the stream where the snake lived, they began to argue. ""The branch is longer!"" ""No, it isn't!"" ""Yes it is!"""Soon the snake came out and asked what the argument was. """I was arguing with my wife, said Anansi. ""She says this stick is longer than you are. But I don't agree."" """"Of course I'm longer than that stick!"" said the snake. ""I'm very long! I'm a huge snake! "Just put your stick next to me and measureAnansi naye teyalwa n'akola ekyo. Yasibira Wamusota ku ttabi ly'omuti asobole okubeera nga yeegolodde bulungi. " When he was all tied up, Anansi took the snake up to heaven."Nyame had to admit that Anansi had paid his price. "So he went to his wooden box, opened the lid, and gave all the stories to Anansi. "Anansi carried the stories triumphantly down to earth. "He shared them with his wife, and with all the other animals and people. ""Stories are for telling, not for keeping in wooden boxes."Anansi the Spider and Rabbit were friends.They lived in a peaceful village in the mountains. Rabbit owned a big farm with lots of vegetables and fruit." Even though Rabbit shared generously with his friend, Anansi was unhappy and jealous."So Anansi thought of a clever plan to take over Rabbit's farm. Soon Rabbit was left poor and homeless. "Anansi was the proud owner of all Rabbit's land, vegetables, and fruit"Anansi went to the market to sell his fruit and vegetables. He made so much money that he filled a big basket with it! "With some of the money, he bought maize for his family, and put it on top of the money in the basket.""Anansi happily headed home with his basket on his head, singing. "He was thinking about all the things he was going to buy with his money.On the way it started to drizzle. Soon the drizzle turned into a heavy downpour. "Anansi the Spider left his basket on the side of the road to shelter under a tree, but from there he kept a close watch on his precious basket.""It started to rain even more heavily,and Anansi was getting cold and wet."So he ran into a hole. """I will stay in this hole until the rain stops,"" said Anansi to himself. """"At least my money is protected by the maize I put on top of it.""""A little while later, Vulture was flying around and spotted the basket on the side of the road. "He saw that there was money and maize in the basket.So he covered the basket with his wings and waited for the rain to stop.Anansi saw Vulture sitting on his basket. """Oh thank you, my friend, for protecting my basket,"" he said to the vulture""""Excuse me, Anansi, did I hear you right?"" asked Vulture. """"Your basket? This basket is mine! I found it here on the road side!"" Anansi could not believe his ears! ""It's mine, I tell you!""""Furious, Anansi went and reported the theft to the chief. ""But Vulture said to the chief and his elders, How could anyone leave a basket full of money and maize unguarded on the road?""""""But I was watching my basket,"" said Anansi It's my money and my maize!"". """"I was looking after the basket when you came and said it was yours!"" replied Vulture.""When the chief and his elders had listened carefully to both sides, they sent Anansi and Vulture away."They discussed the story for a long time.Eventually they reached a decision.They summoned Anansi and the Vulture again." ""We believe Vulture's story,"" they said. ""He is not the thief."You were trying to claim something that was not yours.""" Anansi could not believe his ears! He burst into tears."The news soon spread that the judgement had gone against Anansi."As he walked away, he heard Rabbit laughing and laughing."Rabbit went back to his farm and grew fruit and vegetables."But Anansi was poor again, with no friends.""Many years ago, the Lizard and the Frog were friends."One day they decided to look for girlfriends in the city.The Frog was jealous of the Lizard's shining and brilliant skin."He said, ""What did you do to look so beautiful?""Look at me, lam so ugly.""What can I do about my skin?""""The Lizard said, “Listen! Put some water in a pot and put it on the fire.""Next, ""But the Frog said, ""I know already, I know. ""Shut up, my friend."" And he left."So he arrived home and put some water in a pot."When the water began to boil, he threw himself into it."His skin was burnt and his tail came off!"And instead of being brilliant and beautiful like the Lizard, he was even more ugly!"The man who lived aloneThere was a man who didn't want to live close to his neighbors.And he also didn't want his wife to visit the homes of her neighbors."One day he went and built a home way out in the bush, far from the homes of his neighbours."He would go out every day in the morning and come home late at night.One night the man was very late getting home.A hyena saw what that man was doing.The hyena went and knocked on the door of the house."The woman, thinking it was her husband, opened the door. "The hyena jumped on her and devoured her."The man, when he returned home saw that his wife had been eaten by a hyena. "There was nothing he could Say.All this happened because he didn't want to live near his neighbours."Once upon a time there was a poor couple who had only one child, called Nonkungu. They loved her very much.
""When she was old enough, her parents decided to send Nonkungu to stay with her rich Uncle Mtonyama.
Nonkungu's mother made special clothes with ribbon, buttons and beads. Then Nonkungu set off for her uncle's village.""On her journey, Nonkungu came to a stream. She crossed the stream and met a girl wearing rags. ""The girl asked, ""Where are you going?"" Nonkungu replied, ""I'm going to visit my Uncle Mtonyama.""
""Well, Mtonyama is my uncle, too! I am also on my way to visit him,"" said the girl. They set off together. ""After a while, the girl said to Nonkungu, ""Your clothes are lovely. Please let me try them on."" Nonkungu took off her clothes and gave them to the girl."" When the girl took off her rags, Nonkungu saw that she had a tail! Nonkungu was afraid.
She realised that the girl was really an imbulu.""They walked a little further, and then Nonkungu asked, ""Please give me back my clothes and beads."" The imbulu answered, ""Let me wear them until we get to the next tree."" She pointed to a tree on a hill nearby.""When they reached the tree, Nonkungu asked, ""Please give me back my clothes and beads.""
The imbulu replied, ""Just let me wear them until we get to that field."" She pointed to a field on the next hill.""At last they reached the field. Again Nonkungu asked the imbulu, ""Please give me back my clothes and my beads.""
The imbulu replied, ""Just let me wear them until we get to that hut where the women are sitting."" She pointed to a hut in the distance.""But when they finally got near to the hut, the imbulu pushed Nonkungu back and ran ahead. The imbulu said to the women at the hut, ""Look at this girl wearing rags. She has been following me all day. I wish she would go away."" 
The women turned to look at Nonkungu. She was so frightened that she ran and hid in the kraal."" The imbulu went to Uncle Mtonyama's hut. Mtonyama and his family welcomed the imbulu, who said she was their niece.
Poor Nonkungu continued to hide away."" She sang this song:
""Oh misery me, misery me. I was sent to stay with my Uncle Mtonyama. On the way I met an imbulu. She took my skirt and my
beads. Oh misery me, misery me.""""One day, Mtonyama's eldest son was walking in the field and heard the sad song. He didn't know who was singing, but when he got home, he told his father the words.
Mtonyama went into the fields. He heard the song, and looked until he found Nonkungu.""Nonkungu told her uncle everything that had happened. Mtonyama took her back to
the village and hid her in a hut. He knew what he was going to do to catch the imbulu.
"Mtonyama had heard that an imbulu's tail loves milk and that it can't go past milk without drinking some. So he told his men to dig a hole and fill it with sour milk. Then Mtonyama called all the girls of the village to take part in a jumping competition."
The imbulu was worried. She did not want to jump over the hole, she knew that her tail would be thirsty for the sour milk. So she went into a hut and tied her tail to her body as tightly as she could.
Then she took her place with the other girls.""One girl after another jumped over the hole with the sour milk. At last it was the imbulu's turn.
She tried to jump high over the hole, but her tail broke loose. The imbulu's tail pulled her down, down, down into the sour milk""As the imbulu struggled in the milk, they quickly filled the hole with sand and buried her.
That was the end of the imbulu. Nonkungu stayed happily with her uncle for a long, long time.""Long time ago, in the village of Elunyiko, there lived a man called Ndong'a and his wife called Namukhaywa. "They had six children.All of them were girls."When Namukhaywa was pregnant with her seventh child, Ndong'a warned her, If you give birth to another girl, I will leave  you. ""But if you give me a baby boy, I will hold a big party for you!""""When it was time to give birth, Namukhaywa went to the traditional midwife."Would the child be a girl or a boy?It was a boy AND a girl twins! "She called the boy Mukhwana, and the girl she called Mulongo.""As she looked at Mukhwana, she was very happy. ""But as she looked at Mulongo, she felt sad. "She felt that there was only one thing she could do.Namukhaywa left Mulongo in the care of the midwife and took Mukhwana home to her husband.She proudly showed Ndong'a the baby boy. He was very happy and called all the villagers to celebrate the birth of his son. Mukhwana grew up to be a fine young man. And Mulongo grew up to be a fine young woman."One day, while minding his father's cattle, Mukhwana saw a very beautiful girl.""""This is the girl I want to marry,"" he said to himself.""But when he asked her to marry him, she sang this song "This happened again and again. Mukhwana did not know what to do. "So he went to his mother, Namukhaywa.""""I have found a beautiful girl,"" he said. """"And I want to marry her. ""But every time I ask her, she sings the same song.""""To his surprise, Namukhaywa said, ""What the girl is singing about is true. "That is your sister.You were born twins."Your father wanted a son, not a daughter. ""So I left your baby sister with the midwife, and brought you home to your father.""""When Mukhwana told his father the story, he saw that he had been wrong."He called Namukhaywa and together they went to the midwife to fetch Mulongo."When Mulongo arrived home, her father and the village elders slaughtered a goat and performed the traditional ceremony for re-uniting Mulongo and her seven siblings.""A year later, Mulongo was married to the son of the rich king of that  village."She brought a lot of wealth and happiness to her family."Once upon a time, there lived a man who had plenty of everything""a large fertile farm, with cattle, sheep, and goats""But, as he grew old, he grew sad, because he did not have a wife.""Standing under a tree one day, he had a brilliant idea. ""If he couldn't find a wife, perhaps he could make one?"So he set to work to shape a beautiful woman from a strong branch of the tree"When he had finished making the statue, he touched her eyes, and they opened. ""He blew gently on her, and she came dlive."She was truly the most beautiful woman he had ever seen. "He knelt before her, and asked her to be his wife.""He gave her a colourful apron, beads, and a head ring, the sign of a married woman."And he built her a house with the mud and grass that used to lie at the foot of her trunk"""Only one thing I beg of you,""Never tell anyone where you come from""But before long, the young men from a neighboring village began talking among themselves""""How can such an old man have such a beautiful young wife?"" "So they decided to steal her and take her to their own kraal.The old man was heartbroken. He felt he could not live without her. "But then he thought, ""Perhaps if I have something of hers, I would not feel so sad?"" ""So he sent his doves to find her, to sing to her, and to bring back something of hers to him.""When they found her, they sang to her in the language of birds. """"Tree woman, tree woman. More beautiful than any other. "Your husband has sent us to bring back your apron! "She gave them her apron, and they flew over the hill, over the river, back to her husband. ""He held the apron to his face, and was comforted for a little while."But his longing did not go away.So again he sent his doves to sing to her:"Tree woman, tree woman More beautiful than any other Your husband has sent us To bring back your head ring! ""And back they flew with the head ring, the sign of a married woman.""He held the head ring and sighed for his wife, far away in the kraal of other people.""After a while, he called his doves again. He told them to go to her and sing: ""Tree woman, tree woman More beautiful than any other Your husband has sent us To bring back your life!"So away they went the third time. "They perched on her shoulders.As they sang, each bird pecked out an eye."Immediately she turned again into a statue. Her feet and arms fell away. Then her head. And she fell to the groundHer husband slowly rolled her wooden trunk to the river. He stood her up with her roots in the water. "Nourished by sun and soil, she grew leaves again.""And when the wind blows, the leaves sigh. "Just as d woman does when she longs for her husband.A very tall manHis hoe was too short.Omulyango gw'ali wansi nnyo.His bed was too short.His bicycle was too short.This man was too tall!He made a very long hoe handle.He made very high door frames.He made a very long bed.He bought a very high bicycle.He sat on a very high chair. He ate with a very long fork.He left his house and lived in a big forest.He lived for many years.Thuli has short hair.Anna has long hair.Cathy has the longest hair.Zama has plaited her hair.Baba has a beard.Zanele has combed her hair.Thabo has cut his hair.Themba has shaved his hair.Anna and the Three Hairs"A long time ago, three girls went out to collect wood."It was a hot day so they went down to the river to swim. They played and splashed and swam in the water.Suddenly they realised that it was late.They hurried back to the village."When they were nearly home, Nozibele put her hand to her neck. She had forgotten her necklace!""""Please come back with me!"" she begged her friends."But her friends said it was too late.So Anna went back to the river alone.She found her necklace and hurried home. But she got lost in the dark.In the distance she saw light coming from a hut. She hurried towards it and knocked at the door."To her surprise, a dog opened the door and said, ""What do you want?"" """"I'm lost and I need a place to sleep,"" said Anna."" ""Come in, or I'll bite you!"" said the dog. "So Anna went in."Then the dog said, ""Cook for me!"" """"But I've never cooked for a dog before,""she answered. """"Cook, or I'll bite you!"" said the dog. "So Anna cooked some food for the dog."Then the dog said, ""Make the bed for me!"" Anna answered, ""I've never made""a bed for a dog."" """"Make the bed, or I'll bite youl"" the dog said."So Anna made the bed.Every day she had to cook and sweep and wash for the dog. "Then one day the dog said, ""Anna, today I have to visit some friends.""Sweep the house, cook the food and wash my things before I come back.""""As soon as the dog had gone, Anna took three hairs from her head.""She put one hair under the bed, one behind the door, and one in the fenced area in the village."Then she ran home as fast as she could."When the dog came back, he looked for Anna. """"Anna, where are you?"" he shouted. """"I'm here, under the bed,"" said the first hair.""""I'm here, behind the door,"" said the second hair.""""I'm here,in the fenced area,"" said the third hair."Then the dog knew that Anna had tricked him. So he ran and ran all the way to the village.But Anna's brothers were waiting there with big sticks. The dog turned and ran away and has never been seen since.Dad loves porridge.I love cornflakes.Dad loves coffee.I love milk.Dad loves apples.I love oranges.njagala mugaati omwokyeko.We both love fat cakes (vetkoek).Once upon a time there was a family who lived in a village. The parents in this family woke up early every morning to work in the fields"They left the baby with their elder son, Sipho who was ten years old, and their eldest daughter Bulelwa, who was twelve years old."The older children loved playing outside during the day and they forgot about doing their household chores. They called their friends to come and play with them. The boys loved playing soccer. The girls loved playing with dolls around the yard.They forgot about looking after the baby when their friends arrived.The baby cried and cried and nobody heard.One day the children put the baby under a tree in the shade on a bright red blanket. They went to play. The baby began crying as usual.A group of cranes flew above the playground and felt sorry for the crying baby.They tried to get the children to notice that the baby was crying but the children kept on playing. The cranes decided to take the baby and raise it themselves.Four cranes came to pick up the baby from under the tree. "Each crane took a corner of the baby's blanket, lifted the baby up and flew away. "The children did not notice anything because they were busy playing.The children's parents were working hard in the hot sun.It was so hot that the mother decided to rest under a tree. While she was resting she heard her baby crying. She looked around and she could not see anything. Then she looked up and she saw four cranes flying away with her baby in the bright red blanket.She screamed and chased after the cranes.When the woman told her husband what she saw he did not believe her.The baby slept for a long time without cryingWhen the baby woke up it started crying because it was hungryThey fed it and put it to sleep.Then they flew away to look for more food.They wanted to find a new family that would care for the baby. The cranes hid the baby between the reeds to protect itA big frog heard the baby's cry."The frog thought the cranes had stolen the baby, and decided to hide the baby from the cranes. "Suddenly the frog heard the voices of the cranes.There was no time to hide. The frog swallowed the baby and hid behind a big rock.It came closer and saw the baby wrapped in the blanket"Give me three flies to eat then I will give you the baby,"" said the frog."""The father caught three flies and fed them to the frogThe frog coughed and the baby popped out. "The family and the frog jumped and danced with joy.""""The baby's family was sitting in the evening feeling very sad, Suddenly, a big frog jumped through the door."There was once a girl called Mulongo who lived with her parents near the village of BudongoOne day Mulongo's mother sent her to fetch water at the well."On the way, she met her friends.They were going to the forest to get firewood. "Mulongo wanted to go with them. """Please wait for me under this muvule tree!"" she said,""I have to fetch water for my mother."" "But her friends didn't want to wait."""All right, I'll catch up with you in the forest!"" said Mulongo."She ran off to fetch water and take it to her mother. Then she went to the forest to look for her friends.She followed a path that led to a stream. "On the other side of the stream were many tiny paths each one, leading in a different direction. """"Which path had her friends taken?"" she wondered.""She chose the biggest path, and walked and walked, but she could not find her friends.""She was so tired that when she sat under a tree to rest, she fell fast asleep.""When Mulongo woke up, it was dark. In the darkness, yellow eyes were gleaming. "She was surrounded by hyenas!She was too terrified even to cry out. "She tried running, but the hyenas circled her hungrily.""""Don't move,"" said the gruff voice of the biggest hyena. """"If you run, we'll eat you!"" ""Please let me go home!"" Mulongo pleaded."But instead the hyenas took Mulongo to their house in the forest. It was a dirty hut full of bones and buzzing flies. She lay down and pretended to go to sleep. "In the darkness, she heard the hyenas talking to each other. ""How is the fire doing?"" one hyena asked.""""Is the water boiling?""""""Everything is ready,"" was the reply. """"Should I bring her?"" """"Yes, yes!"" growled the other hyenas. ""We're hungry!""" They were ready to drag Mulongo out of the hut."But the big hyena spoke, ""Hyenas, wait. "Remember the rule of the village. No hyena may eat alone."We have to invite the whole family to share a meal.""""""T'll go and call the in laws,"" said his wife."" ""I'll go and fetch my cousins,"" said the small hyena. """"I'll fetch our brothers and sisters,"" said another. """"And Twill remain here with our food,"" said the big hyena.""The big hyena sat in the doorway of the hut and the others went off in different directions. They took a long time, and the big hyena began to doze in front of the warm fire."Soon he was snoring. This was Mulongo's chance!But how was she going to get past the hyena? He was so big he filled the whole doorway.There was only one way."She took a flying leap right over the hyena's back, and ran as fast as her legs could carry her.""Just then the other hyenas returned, and saw what had happened.""They ran after her, howling with anger and disappointment."But it was too late."As she came to her village, one of the villagers recognised her and shouted, ""Mulongo, Mulongo is coming, Mulongo is coming."""" Her father and mother ran out to meet her. ""They hugged her, while thanking God for saving their child, ""Mulongo, Mulongo, we thought you had died!""""From that day, Mulongo and the other children never again went back to the forest alone.""Once upon a time, there was a man and his wife."They had six boys and one girl.The girl's name was Natabo. Her parents loved Natabo more than they loved her brothers.The parents gave a small pot as a gift to their daughter."One day, by accident, the boys broke Natabo's pot. It broke into small pieces. The brothers did not know what to do. They threw the pieces into the bush."Natabo looked for her pot but did not find it.She got very upset and cried. She refused to eat anything."She begged her parents and brothers to find the pot, but they could not."Natabo became even more upset. She ran away and went to the forest.She climbed up the tallest tree in the forest.Natabo's parents searched for their daughter."They found her, and asked her to climb down.""But she refused. They told her to come down, but she still refused."Natabo's brothers gathered and sang a song to ask her to come down."This is the song: ""Our last born, come down and we can go home."" We shall get a new pot!""""Natabo made fun of her brothers. She sang the same song, but imitating the boys,""""Ninini-ninio, ninini-ninio. Ninini-ninio, ninini-ninio!"""Natabo's friend came and tried to coax her to climb down."She sang, ""My friend,come down and we will go home. ""We shall get a new pot!""""Gradually, Natabo began to climb down the tree."Her friend continued to sing until Natabo reached the ground.Natabo hugged her friend.They walked slowly back to Natabo's home.Natabo's brothers and parents were joyful when the girls returned. "The family had a party, with many friends and relatives.""""Mom,"" calls Lebo.""Come and look.""These clothes are all too small for me!"" ""Let me see,"" says Mom.""""Look at my skirt.""It's too small,"" says Lebo. ""Yes, it is,"" says Mom.""""Nomsa can have your Skirt.""""""Look at my jersey. It's too small,"" says Lebo. ""Yes, it is,""""says Mom. ""Nomsa can have your jersey.""""""Look at my raincoat. It's too small,"" says Lebo.""""Yes, it is,"" says Mom. ""Nomsa can have your raincoat.""""""Look at my socks.They're too small,""says Lebo. """"Yes, they are,"" says Mom. ""Nomsa can have our socks.""""""Look at my shoes. They're too small,"" says Lebo. """"Yes, they are,"" says Mom. ""Nomsa can have your shoes.""""""Now you have lots of clothes,"" says Lebo. """"Oh no I don't,"" says Nomsa. ""These clothes are all too big for me!""""Once up on a time, there were two friends. ""The one was clever, the other was stupid."The stupid man's wife was clever. The clever man's wife was stupid."While they were chatting, the clever man said, ""Your wife is clever, but you are stupid. ""My wife is also stupid, so she might be more compatible with you.""""The stupid man asked, ""Between me and you, who is stupider?"" Then he said, ""Iam as clever as you are.""""In front of the judge, the clever man asked, ""How many stars are there in the sky?"Where is the Centre of the world?"Answer both questions, or we will swap our wives."""The judge allowed some time for the stupid man to return with the answers "One night, the stupid man was counting the stars, sitting on the roof of his house.""""What are you doing?"" his wife asked him.""He replied, ""My friend asked me how many stars there are in the sky, and where the centre of the earth is.""Now I'm counting the stars.""""""Don't worry, I will tell you the answers,"" said his wife. ""She gave her husband a sack of grain. She said, ""If they ask you how many stars are in the sky, tell them it is the same as the number of grains in the sack.""""Then she gave him a stick and said, ""If they ask you where the centre of the world is, push the stick into the ground and tell them it is in the centre. ""If they complain, tell them to measure it."""The stupid man arrived with his wife's advice."First he answered, ""The number of stars is the same as the number of grains in this sack.""""Then he pushed the stick into the ground and said, ""This is the centre of the earth""The judge was amused and asked, ""Who told you this?"""" The stupid man replied, ""My wife.""""The judge continued, ""Your wife is very clever, so she should be with a clever man.""You will swap your wives."" Then,the judge set an appointment to swap their wives.""The stupid man told his wife, ""I won, but the judge said that you are clever, and don't deserve to be with me.""""His wife replied, ""Don't worry I have a solution to this too."""The time came for the judge to swap the wives. The clever wife gave the judge a saucepan of food as a gift."When the judge opened the saucepan, he saw a roasted chicken still with all its feathers!""Shocked, he muttered, ""Oh, I see, so she belongs with her stupid husband afterall!"""Tingi lived with his grandmother.He used to look after the cows with her.One day the soldiers came.They took the cows away.Tingi and his grandmother ran away.They hid in the bush until night.Then the soldiers came back.Grandmother hid Tingi under the leaves."One of the soldiers put his foot right on him, but he kept quiet.""When it was safe, Tingi and his grandmother came out."They crept home very quietly.The girl with one breast"A long time ago, there was a man who lived with his wife whom he loved very much. "One day he took a walk to the forest. "Along the way, he met a tall, slender, and very beautiful girl."He fell in love with her at first sight. The girl too readily accepted  him.But she told him that she had only one breast."So she told him to go home, cut off one of his wife's breasts and bring it to her. ""Then she would have two breasts, and they could marry. ""The man ran very fast back home, picked a knife, pounced on his dear wife, and the breast was off instantly."He hurried back to the forest to where he had left his newfound darling. But she was nowhere to be seen. "He called her name very loudly, but there  was complete silence. ""Then he heard a voice saying, ""Why are you calling?""Don't you know that you are in the forest area of Musambwa kwa Libeeletwela?""""When the man heard that, he ran home as fast as a bullet only to find his wife had just died. "was so grief stricken because of what he had done that he too died."In my home village, there is a trader called Dembe."Dembe has a big shop in the village."The shop sells flour, sugar, rice, beans, and many more things."Dembe and his wife have three children. The children help in the shop during the holidays.Dembe has a business book. In the book he writes the amount they earn each day. Dembe and his wife can afford a big house and a car."One day, the children will take over the shop. But first they will finish school.""They also keep cows,chickens and rabbits."Big blue bus"There was only one
bus in Ebei's
village. It was big
and blue. It was
very noisy.""""Tomorrow we will
go to town,"" said
Ebei's mother. ""We
will buy your school
uniform.""""Ebei was very excited. They would
travel in the big
blue bus. He could

not sleep that

Ebei was very
night.""When his mother
came to wake
him, Ebei was
already dressed.""Ebei and his
mother walked to
the bus stop. They
waited for the big
blue bus. But the
bus did not come.""Other people
arrived at the bus
stop. They
complained
because the bus
was late. ""Where is
the bus?"" they
asked.""""Ebei was worried.
""""We will not be able
to go to town,"""" he
thought. """"I will not
be able to get my
uniform.""""""""Some people gave
up and went home.
Ebei cried. He did
not want to go.
""We will wait a bit
longer,"" said his
mother.""Suddenly, they
heard a noise. They
saw dust in the air.
The bus was
coming!""But this bus was
not blue. It was not
big. It was red and
small. The people
did not want to get
in this bus.""""Get in! Get in!""
shouted the driver.
""We are very late
today,"" he called.""Ebei and his
mother got in first.
Soon everyone else
got in the small red
bus.""Ebei looked out the
window. He saw
more people at the
bus stop.""Even more people
were running to
catch the bus. But
they were too late.
The red bus was
full. It left for town.""""Where is the big
blue bus?"" asked
Ebei's mother. ""It
broke down,""
replied the
driver. ""We are
fixing it. It will
come tomorrow.""Ebei did not care
about the colour of
the bus. He did not
care about the size.
This bus was going
to town!""Clouds can bring
snow. I like clouds."Clouds can bring rain. I like clouds."Clouds can hide the
sun. I like clouds.""Clouds can hide the

stars. I like clouds.""How many cats?

O Zero cats.""How many cats?

1 One cat.""How many cats?

2 Two cats.""How many cats?

3 Three cats.""How many cats?

4 Four cats.""How many cats?

5 Five cats.""How many cats?

6 Six cats.""How many cats?

7 Seven cats.""How many cats?

8 Eight cats.""What is this we
see?

A kitten is stuck in
a tree!

""T will rescue you!""""""Mama, can we
keep him? Just one
more!""

How many cats?

9 Nine cats.""I like to read
"Who can I read to?"My mother and
grandmother are
busy.""My father and
grandfather are
busy.""Who can I read to?
I can read to
myself!""Counting

animals""One elephant is
going to drink
water.""Two giraffes are
going to drink
water.""Three buffaloes
and four birds are
also going to drink
water.""Five antelopes and
six warthogs are
walking to the
water.""Seven zebras are
running to the
water.""One lion roars. He
also wants to drink.
Who is afraid of the
lion?""One elephant is
drinking water with
the lion.""Kate has a thing in
her head.

How will they
remove it?""It makes her tired.
It pains her.

It makes her feel
heavy.""She can't eat. She
can't drink.

She is not as jolly
as before.""The doctor sees a
swelling in her
head and says,
""There is a tumour
in your brain.""""""We have to
remove it from
your brain right
now. We have to
remove it now!"" the
doctor says.""They bring a
stretcher.""Oh dear. Poor woman! Her head throbs with pain.

A doctor scans her head.""They arrange the
surgical blades.""They inject her with
syringes.""They cut open
Kate's head."They remove  the brain"They cut out the
tumour.""They return the
brain to the skull.

Then they stitch the
head back together
again.""Does Kate feel
everything they do?

No! Kate is in
heaven. She does
not feel. She does
not eat. She does
not think. For 24
hours!""Then she comes
back to life!""Now she is well.
Like a new born
baby.""We are all happy
for our friend Kate,
who tasted heaven.""Zama is getting
ready for school.""Dad is cooking
porridge for
breakfast.""""Mom makes the
best porridge!""
says Zama.""Porridge gives
Zama energy for
school.""The porridge is
ready.""Dad pours the milk, with love.""""Dad, I think this
porridge needs
more sugar,"" says
Zama.""""Mom's porridge
tastes much better
than Dad's
porridge,"" thinks
Zama.""""Dad, please can I have more sugar?""

asks Zama."Dad gives Zama more sugar."""Wu! Dad! You put
salt on my
porridge!"""" ""Dad, when will Mom be home?""
asks Zama.""Danger of
abandoning a

mother""There was a man called
Lodipo. He lived with his
two wives, Akai and
Akitela.""Lodipo's first wife, Akai,
was the only one who
helped his blind mother.""One day, Lodipo's younger
wife, Akitela, said, ""Let us
move away to a safer
place."" The place where
they lived was constantly
attacked by cattle raiders.
Akitela felt unsafe.""Lodipo told Akitela that his
blind mother did not want
to move. Akitela insisted
that they should move,
and leave Lodipos' mother
behind. ""If we don't move
away from here, I will
return to my parents,""
Akitela cried to Lodipo.""Lodipo loved Akitela very
much so he gave in to her
demands. They prepared
to leave. The first wife,
Akai, watched all this
happening with confusion.""Lodipo's blind mother sat
on a goat skin under a
tree. She was unaware of
what was going on. ""How
can we leave her on her
own?"" Akai wondered to
herself.""Lodipo and his wives
loaded all their belongings
on their two camels. They
left quietly without even
saying goodbye to the old
woman. Akai was crying
because she was sad to
leave her mother-in-law all
alone.""The old woman cried and sang this sad song calling on her son. She
wondered who would take care of her. She wondered who would take
her out of the hot sun.""Immediately after Lodipo
and his wives had left, raiders attacked the place.""The raiders asked the old
woman to tell them where
her son went. ""We are
going after him to kill
him,"" they told her. She
pleaded, ""Don't kill the first
wife and her children."" She
also asked them to get
back her ram, which
Lodipo took with him.""The warriors followed
Lodipo. Just as he was
settling down in the new
place, they caught up with
him. They killed him and
his young wife.""The first wife, Akai, went
back with the ram. They
lived together happily.""I had never worn shoes
before. When I saw
children wearing nice
shoes, I would look at
them with longing.""My mother would say,
""You will have many pairs
in the future, just wait!""

Sometimes I did not
believe her. ""When is the
future?"" I asked her one
day.""Time passed and it was
nearly Christmas.
Everybody was busy going
to the market and coming
back with bags of new
things.

""Mother, are we going to
the market?"" I asked her.""The day before Christmas,
my mother woke me up
earlier than usual.

She asked me to fetch the
big shopping basket she
always carried to the
market.""At the open-air market
there, were many parents
with their children.

They were buying new
clothes and stocking up on
food.""We went straight to where
there were many different
types of shoes.

My eyes were wide with
amazement. I gaped at
row after row of neatly
arranged shoes.""After trying on many pairs,
IT settled for black lace-up
shoes. At home that night,
I couldn't sleep.

I was so excited thinking of
how I would wear my new
shoes and show off to
every child in the village.""After a while, I got out of
bed and put on the shoes.

I walked slowly around the
room and then put the
shoes back into the box.

I lay down again, but I
couldn't sleep.""I got up and tried on the
shoes a second time.

I strutted around the room
for a while and then put
them back.""I lay down once more and
tried to sleep. But I got up
a third time. I put on the
shoes and jumped around
the room.

Then I felt tired. I decided
to get back into bed.""The following morning, I
was woken by my mother.
""What is this I see?"" she
asked.""I was wearing my new
shoes in bed!""Man who grew

feathers""Once upon a time, there
was a rich man who had
two sons. The rich man
wrote in his will that the
first son should get all his
cows. And only one rooster
should go to his second
son.""So, after the man died, his
first son got all the cows.
The second son was only
given one rooster.""After some time, the rich
son became sick. He went
to the healer to ask what
he should do to get better.
The healer said, ""You
should slaughter a rooster
of a special colour.""""The rich son did not know
where to get the rooster of
the special colour. Then he
remembered his brother's
rooster. He sent some
people to his brother.""The brother said to them,
""All that I have is this
rooster. But if it can make
my brother better, I would
rather lose the rooster.""
He generously gave the
rooster."The people slaughtered it and fed it to the sick brother. The brother recovered from his sickness."After some time a most
unusual thing happened.
The rich brother's body
began growing feathers.""He could not believe his
eyes,""He went to the elders.
They said, ""This is the
result of being unfair to
your brother. You have
taken all the cows, and the
rooster that your father
left him."" The elders told
the rich brother, ""To get
better, your brother must
forgive you.""""The elders continued, ""We
will take this bracelet as a
sign of forgiveness and
give it to your brother. If
he spits on it, you'll be
cured.""""The elders took the
bracelet to the brother
and said, ""Spit on it and
forgive your brother."" The
brother spat on it.""As arresult, the elders
decided to give the poor brother half of the rich

brother's cows.""There was a spider called Anansi. Anansi was
too lazy to cook his own food. Instead, he
used to visit his friends and eat the delicious
food they had cooked.""One day, Anansi was passing Rabbit's house
when he smelled green vegetables cooking.
He was very excited. Rabbit said to Anansi,
""They're not quite ready yet. You can help me
to wash up while we wait."" Anansi replied,
""Sorry, I have things to do. I'll come back
later.""""""How will I call you when they're ready?""
asked Rabbit. Anansi thought for a minute.
""T'll spin a web,"" he said. ""I'll tie one end
around my leg and one end to your pot.
When the greens are ready, pull on the web
string. I'll come right away."" So Anansi tied
the web to the pot, and walked on.""Anansi saw Monkey and his wife, cooking
beans in a large pot. ""Come and join us! The
beans are nearly ready."" Monkey said. Anansi
replied, ""Sorry, I have things to do. Let me tie
one end of this web around my leg and one
end to your pot. When the beans are ready,
pull on the web string, and I'll come.""""""As Anansi walked by Warthog's house, he
smelled sweet potatoes. Warthog told
Anansi, """"My pot is full of sweet potatoes and
honey! Come and share my food with me.
Take this fork and help me to stir it."""" Anansi
replied, """"I'll come back later. Let me tie one
end of this web around my leg and one end
to your pot. When the sweet potatoes are
ready, pull on the web string, and I'll come.""""""""By the time Anansi arrived at the river, each
of his eight legs was tied to a pot of delicious
food. Then, Anansi felt a pull on one of his
legs. ""Rabbit's food is ready!"" Anansi thought,
licking his lips.""He felt a second pull. And a third. And a
fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth pull.
Everyone was pulling on the web strings at
the same time! ""Stop! Stop!"" he cried in pain,
as his legs were stretched thinner and
thinner. But no one could hear him.""Finally, the web strings could hold no longer.
They snapped, one by one. Anansi rolled into
the river to soothe his painful legs. But his
legs would not return to their normal shape.
Anansi was too embarrassed to go to any of
his friends that day."Greedy woman"Long time ago, there was
aman called Kato. He
lived in Kabuusu town. He
stayed with his dog in a
small house.""One day Kato was very
sick. He had no one to help
him. When he recovered,
he decided he would
marry a woman who lived
nearby.""He invited friends and
relatives to attend the
marriage ceremony. Kato
was very excited because
he thought he was getting
a helper.""Many things were brought
for the bride and her
groom. These were
baskets of millet, mats,
bananas, groundnuts, and
other gifts for the home.""The wedding function
ended and all the visitors
left for their homes. Kato
was ready to start a new
life with his wife and the
dog.""The next day, Kato served

sweet banana to his wife,
but she refused to eat.""When Kato went out to
hunt, the woman ate all
the sweet bananas.""Kato came back from
hunting and he was
hungry. He asked for
sweet bananas. His wife
said that the dog had
eaten them all!""The following day, Kato
went to his farm. When he
came home, he found that
his wife had eaten all the
meat. She did not even
share with the dog.""Another day, Kato went to
visit his friend and when
he came back, the woman
had eaten all the
groundnuts. The basket
was completely empty.
Kato was annoyed with his
new wife.""Kato thought, ""Something

is wrong with this woman.""
He decided to apply magic.
He put milk in a magic pot,
put the pot under the bed,""The woman saw the pot,
and that it was full of milk.
At once, she picked up the
pot and put it to her
mouth. She drank all the
milk while the dog
watched her.""Unfortunately, the pot got
stuck to her mouth. She
tried to remove the pot but
all in vain. She shouted,
and jumped up and down.
But the pot stayed stuck.
The dog watched all this.""Then the dog ran off to
find Kato. The dog barked
and barked, and jumped
up and down. Kato
realised that something
was wrong at home.""They ran home together.
Kato was very surprised to
find his wife with a pot
stuck to her mouth. He
looked at her and
wondered.""Kato touched his wife's
cheek and the pot dropped
down at once. The woman
was very ashamed. She
decided to go back to her
parents' home."This is Jaaka the  fisherman from Naminya."He fishes on the
river Nile.""He has a boat,
fishing net and a
hook.""He always wakes
up very early in the
morning to catch
the Nile perch.""At around 10am,
he's selling his
catch in Jinja
central market.""Jaaka what
happened? Was it a
loss? He's so sad.""""Today the
situation is bad.
The Nile breeze did
not permit me to
fish. And one perch
swam away with
my hook.""""""But I have hope
that tomorrow will
be good, because
I've bought a new
hook.""""Tasneem was a beautiful girl and her
grandmother was very kind. ""Her
grandmother spent many hours
making a handsome makgabe for
Tasneem.

Tasneem loved to wear that apron.""The other girls were jealous of
Tasneem's makgabe. They thought
that it would be better to get rid of it.

But it is a difficult thing to take a
person's clothes when that person is
wearing them.""One morning the girls invited Tasneem
to go swimming with them in a river
nearby.

At the river bank, they all took off their
makgabes so that the cloth would not
be damaged. Then they jumped into
the water and splashed around for
some time.""
The very large snake heard someone
weeping. He saw the beautiful
Tasneem. He swallowed the makgabe
and Tasneem!""Fortunately for Tasneem, the snake did
not like the taste of the makgabe. He
spat it out. He also spat out Tasneem.

She lay on the river bank, covered with
slime from the snake's stomach. This
slime smelled very bad.""The smelly Tasneem ran home to her
parents. She sang, ""Mother, open the
door for me, Iam smelly. Mother, open
the door for me, Iam smelly. Mother,
open the door for me, the smell is very
bad.""

""Her mother heard Tasneem and ran
out of the house. She sang back to the
girl, ""Go away, you are smelly. Go
away, you are smelly. Go away, the
smell is very bad.""""Tasneem was very upset. She ran off
to the house of her aunt and uncle.
She sang, ""Open the door for me, lam
smelly. Open the door for me, Iam
smelly. Open the door for me, the
smell is very bad.""

""They heard Tasneem and ran out of
the house. They sang back to the girl,
""Go away, you are smelly. Go away,
you are smelly. Go away, the smell is
very bad.""""Tasneem had only her grandmother's
house to go to. Her heart was heavy.
She thought nobody wanted to look
after a smelly child.""But she was wrong. Her grandmother
did not send her away. She washed
Tasneem, and her makgabe. Soon
Tasneem was no longer smelly, she
was clean.""Tasneem stayed with her grandmother
for many years.

One day the son of a rich chief asked
her to marry him. Tasneem's parents
heard about the marriage. They
wanted her to come back to live in
their house.""Tasneem told them that she would
never go back to their house.

""Parents must love their children,"" she
said, ""even if their children are smelly.""""Instead Tasneem invited her
grandmother to live with her in the
house of this rich chief and his son.

""Her grandmother was very happy, and
very comfortable, and felt very
important.""Disability is not
inability""This is Agnes. She
is my teacher."Agnes uses  crutches to walk."This is Metobo. He
is my favourite
radio Dj.""Metobo has
problems with his
eyes.""This is Moraa, my neighbour. Moraa
is a farmer.""Moraa cannot
hear. She speaks
using Sign
Language.""This is Osero. He is
the best soccer
player at my
school.""Osero has no
hands. But he scores many goals
for our team!"I can run with it.I can jump with it.I can dance with it.I can swim with it.I can skip with it."Ican escape with
it." I learnt a lesson"She told me many
secrets except one.""“What is the basket
and leaves for?”

Grandma said, “For
magic.”""I wanted to watch.

But grandma sent
me to do
something else.""“Where are they?”

“They are in my
magic place,”
grandma said.""Grandma sent me
to her room.

I smelled ripening
bananas.""Thad discovered
grandma's magic
place.

IT had seen the
ripening bananas.""I ate one.

It was the sweetest
banana I had ever
tasted.""I had discovered
grandma's magic
place.

I had seen the
ripening bananas.""I ate one.

It was the sweetest
banana I had ever
tasted.""When I was called
later, I knew why.

I never stole again.""Lazy little
brother"I boil some water."I chop the
firewood."I sweep the floor.I wash the dishes.Why do I work so hard?"When my brother is
busy playing!""My first day at
the market""I live in Kakuma village, a very hot dry
place, full of thorny trees, and more
goats than people. Even the market
place is quiet, with only a few small
shops. Most people use bicycles for
transport.""One morning my mother called me
and said, ""Etabo, today you turn six
years old. We have a present for you.""
""What is it? What is it?"" I asked eagerly.
""Tomorrow we're going by bus to the
market in Eldoret,"" she replied, ""And
we're taking you with us!"" My first visit
to the city! I was so excited that I could
hardly sleep that night.""The next day at the Kakuma bus stop, I
stood between my mother and my
aunt. I wore my new pair of blue jeans
and a red T-shirt. I felt very small
between my tall slender mother and
my big round aunt.""The bus was very full, so I had to sit on
my mother's lap. Tired from the heat
and excitement, I slept the whole way
and saw nothing.""The sun was just rising when we
reached Eldoret market. At the
entrance was a woman selling grains.
Over in one corner there were two
men getting ready to lay out their
sweet potatoes. Over in another
corner was a woman holding a shiny
blue helicopter. ""Mother, mother, look
at that helicopter!"" But mother pulled
me away.""In the middle of the market, there was
a large stall that sold different types of
fruit. Some of them I had never seen
before. ""What are the names of these
fruits?"" I asked my mother. She
pointed, ""These are oranges, and
these are guavas."" I turned around
and said, ""And these?""""Of all the fruits at the stall, I liked the
apples most. I liked their shape and
colour. I wondered how they tasted. I
turned to mother and said, ""Could you
buy one for me?""""As soon as she gave me the apple, I let
go of my mother's hand, took the fruit
with both hands, and bit into the juicy
flesh. I had never enjoyed a fruit the
way I enjoyed that apple. All I cared
about was my apple.""When I finished the apple, I looked up
to talk to my mother. But she was not
there! My mother and aunt had gone.
I looked to the right, then to the left.
But they were nowhere to be seen.
""Have you seen my mother?"" I asked
the women selling potatoes nearby.
They took no notice. I started to cry.""A while later, a woman took me by the
hand and led me to a place where
there were other children. A big man
with a thick beard asked, ""What's your
name, boy?"" ""E-ta-bo,"" I replied
through my tears.""I wondered if children were also sold
at the market. I stopped crying and
looked around to see if anyone would
buy the children in the room. Soon a
woman came in and picked up one of
the children. ""I will be the next one to
be taken away,"" I thought. ""And then
I'll never see home again!"" I started
crying once more.""When I heard the big man with the
thick beard saying, ""Where is Etabo?"" I
cried even harder. ""I do not want to go
with you!"" I sobbed. I hid away from
him.""When my mother and aunt heard my
name, they rushed to the room.
""Etabo, Etabo!"" a familiar voice called.
It was my mother.""As I got up to hug my mother, my aunt
said, ""Etabo, we were looking for you
to give you your birthday present.""
And from a big bag, my aunt pulled
out a shiny blue helicopter. ""It's
yours!"" she said."Kabali and Kateera are friends."Kabali has a cat.
Kateera has a
rabbit.""Kabali plays with
his cat every day.""Kateera feeds his
rabbit twice a day.""Kateera's rabbit
produced six
babies. Two rabbits
were black. Two
rabbits were
brown. Two rabbits
were white.""Kabali's cat
produced three
babies. One kitten
was male. Two
kittens were
female.""Kateera sold four
of the baby rabbits.
He used the money
to buy books and
pencils for school.""Kabali did not sell
any kittens. The
people in the
village did not want
cats.""Once upon a time, there was an old woman who lived with her three grandchildren.""Every morning they all
went to work in the field.
One day, one of the girls
said, ""Grandmother, I
don't feel well today.""""So, the old woman sent the child home.""When the girl got home,
she saw that there was
meat in the pot.
She ate all the meat and
then went to sleep.""The old woman and two
children were tired and
hungry when they
returned from the field.
Grandmother prepared
ugali for supper, to eat
with the meat she had
cooked that morning.""She opened the pots to
serve her grandchildren.
When she opened the pot
with the meat, it was
empty!""""Who ate the meat?"" asked
Grandmother, frowning.
But all three grandchildren
shook their heads. ""Not
me,"" each one said.""Their grandmother tied a
rope across the river.
She told each of them to
walk on the rope as they
sang a song.""""The one that ate the meat
will fall into the river, and
learn to tell the truth,""
warned Grandmother.
The first granddaughter
walked quickly across the
river, singing the song.""The song went like this: ""Nimbe esia ulire inyama. Mukoye khalira
engwe mu nyanza. Engwe mu ndaliro engwe munyanza. Mukoye
khalira engwe mu nyanza.""""The other two
grandchildren began to
argue with each other.
The girl said to the boy,
""You go next."" The boy
replied, ""No, you go next!""""The granddaughter who
ate the meat was scared
and shivering.
As she stepped forward to
walk on the rope, she
slipped and fell into the
river.""""Help! Help!"" shouted the
girl.
Grandmother said to the
other two, ""She is guilty,
but we must help her.""""Together they pulled the
frightened girl out of the
river.
Since that day, the old
woman's grandchildren
have always told the truth."This is Mr Fly.This is Mr Big Head."Mr Big Head and
Mr Fly were friends.
One day, they went
for a walk
together.""They came to the
edge of a river, and
started arguing
with each other. Mr
Fly said, ""You can't
jump over this
river!"" ""Yes, I can!
It's you who can't!""
replied Mr Big
Head.""""You jump!"" said
Mr Fly. ""No, you
jump first,"" said Mr
Big Head. So Mr Fly
= flew across the river.""Then Mr Big Head
jumped into the
river. But his head
was so big that he
started to sink.""Mr Fly laughed,
""Hee hee!"" But he
laughed so much
that his mouth tore
in two from one
side to the other!"Sound Aaa.I am Ana Maria Namata.My dad is Mr. Agaba Ali.My mum is Ananga Asha. She cares and loves me so much.Male is a tall man."Namagala is a
prayerful girl."Sound Aaa i will never forget you.How Ant saved Dove"It was a hot
summer day in the
dry forest.""Little Ant had no
water for many
days.""""I need a drop of
water, even if it
falls from a leaf,""
cried Little Ant.""But even the dew
had dried up.""""If I do not have
water, I will die,""
cried Little Ant. ""I
must go to the river
I heard about.""""""The river is full
and strong. It will
sweep you away,""
warned a wise
squirrel.""But Little Ant was
extremely thirsty. ""I
will die if I don't
drink some water.""
So, he went to look
for the river.""He walked past
tufts of grass and
over dry branches.""He walked until he
heard water
splashing. It was
the river! He could
hear waves.""Little Ant took a
long sip of cool
water.""He was so happy
he did not see a
wave coming.""Little Ant tried to
grab some grass
floating past him.
But he was swept
away by the water.""""Help me someone.
Help me please!""
he called.""""Quick, climb on,""
said White Dove,
holding a branch in
her beak.""""I will stay here
until I can thank
the dove,"" decided
Little Ant. ""I will
wait until she
comes back to
drink.""""One day as he
waited, two boys
came to the river.
They had their
slingshots.""""There is a big
white dove that
comes here to
drink,"" said one
boy. ""We will have
it for Supper
tonight.""""""I cannot let the boys kill White Dove,"" thought Little Ant. ""But I am so tiny, what can I do?"" "Just then White Dove flew down from the tree to drink. Little Ant had an idea. He jumped onto one boy's foot. Little Ant bit that boy as hard as he could. "The boy jumped. ""Ouch!"" he shouted. "White Dove was startled and flew away to safety. That was how Little Ant thanked White Dove for saving him. Man and Lion"Once upon a time,
Man was walking
in the bush.
Suddenly, he met
Lion!""Lion was resting in
the short grass.""The meeting was
so sudden that
Man did not know
what to do. He was
full of fear.""At first, Lion was
surprised too, and
a little afraid. But
there was a low
rumble in his
stomach, because
he was hungry.""Man suddenly
found himself up a
tall tree. He began
to shout at Lion.""Lion lay down
under the tree,
waiting for his
meal. As time went
on, Lion fell asleep,
or so it seemed.""Soon Man fell
asleep. Then he
woke up again.
Finally he dozed off
and went fast
asleep.""But then he
crashed down on
the sleeping Lion!""They both woke up
confused and
frightened. Lion
forgot his meal and
ran for his life.""Man began to run
in the same
direction as Lion.
Then he realized
that he was
running behind
Lion!""So he changed
direction and
escaped. He was
not eaten by Lion!"My family and I"My dinosaur and I
look at my birds in
the sky.""My birds and I
meet Chimpanzee
in the tree.""My chimpanzee
and I play with my
giraffes on the hill.""My giraffes and I
make monkey balls
from clay.""My monkey and I
eat bananas with
Gorilla every day.""
My gorilla and
monkey fear
Tortoise in every
way.""Tortoise and I go
home very slowly
with Snake.""Snake and I love to
hiss and sing songs
by the lake.""My entire family
and I live together
in great happiness!"Hen and Eagle"Once upon a time, Hen
and Eagle were friends.
They lived in peace with all
the other birds. None of
them could fly.""One day, there was famine
in the land. Eagle had to
walk very far to find food.
She came back very tired.
""There must be an easier
way to travel!"" said Eagle.""After a good night's sleep,
Hen had a brilliant idea.
She began collecting the
fallen feathers from all
their bird friends. ""Let's
sew them together on top
of our own feathers,"" she
said. ""Perhaps that will
make it easier to travel.""""Eagle was the only one in
the village with a needle,
so she started sewing first.
She made herself a pair of
beautiful wings and flew
high above Hen. Hen
borrowed the needle but
she soon got tired of
sewing. She left the needle
on the cupboard and went
into the kitchen to prepare
food for her children.""But the other birds had
seen Eagle flying away.
They asked Hen to lend
them the needle to make
wings for themselves too.
Soon there were birds
flying all over the sky.""When the last bird
returned the borrowed
needle, Hen was not there.
So her children took the
needle and started playing
with it. When they got tired
of the game, they left the
needle in the sand.""Later that afternoon,
Eagle returned. She asked
for the needle to fix some
feathers that had
loosened on her journey.
Hen looked on the
cupboard. She looked in
the kitchen. She looked in
the yard. But the needle
was nowhere to be found.""""Just give me a day,"" Hen
begged Eagle. ""Then you
can fix your wing and fly
away to get food again.""
""Just one more day,"" said
Eagle. ""If you can't find the
needle, you'll have to give
me one of your chicks as
payment.""""When Eagle came the next
day, she found Hen
scratching in the sand, but
no needle. So Eagle flew
down very fast and caught
one of the chicks. She
carried it away. Forever
after that, whenever Eagle
appears, she finds Hen
scratching in the sand for
the needle.""As the shadow of Eagle's
wing falls on the ground,
Hen warns her chicks. ""Get
out of the bare and dry
land."" And they respond:
""We are not fools. We will
run.""""There was a time when all
the animals lived together
as friends. One day they
decided to have a meeting
to elect a king.""Rooster wanted to be king.
So he lied to the other
animals. He told them,
""The red comb on my head
is fire! Don't touch the
comb on my head!""""The other animals believed
Rooster. They decided to
elect Rooster as their king.
The animals hoped that
Rooster's fire would help
them in cold weather.""Then came a day when it
rained. And it rained. And
rained. It was cold.
Everything was wet and
cold.""""Where can we get fire to
warm our bodies?"" Rabbit
asked the other animals.""""We can get fire from the
comb on Rooster's head,""
replied Monkey. ""Rooster
is our king because he has
fire on his head,"" said
Monkey.""The animals agreed with
Monkey. They sent Fox to
collect fire from king
Rooster.""Fox found Rooster in a
deep sleep. So he decided
to take fire without asking
Rooster.""Fox collected some dry
grass. He put the grass
next to the comb on
Rooster's head. Nothing
happened. The grass did
not catch fire.""""Wake up king Rooster!""
yelled Fox. ""We need fire
now.”""But Rooster could not give
fire to Fox.
""Fox was angry. He went
back to the other animals.
He told them the truth
about the comb on
Rooster's head. From that
day, no one was afraid of
Rooster. And foxes eat
roosters and their families."This is meThis is my picture.I am six years old."This is a picture of

my family.""My favourite food
is fried fish and
chips.""I can draw my
hand.""Khayanga and
her gourd""Khayanga lived with her parents
happily until they died when she was
ten years old.""Khayanga was taken in by Rosa, a
distant relative. Rosa was kind to
Khayanga, but she was old, frail and
poor.""Khayanga often visited her parents'
graves to tell them of her misery.""One day when she visited, she received
a gift. It was a very special Gourd
which appeared from her parents’
graves.""The Gourd sang a beautiful and
soothing song. Khayanga recognised
the voice as that of her late mother. It
went like this.""Khayanga, ee, Khayanga! Our child the loved one! You're not alone, loved one!
Have this gourd, loved one! Carry it everywhere you go, loved one! Let it console
you loved one!""Khayanga carried her special Gourd
everywhere. With her Gourd,
Khayanga felt her parents' presence
and protection.""One day, something bad happened to
her special Gourd. It broke when she
was fetching water in the river.
Khayanga's heart broke as well.""Khayanga held the pieces of the
broken Gourd in her small hands and
sang:""Father and Mother, see the gourd is broken. The gourd you gave me. What do I
do, Mother and Father? Be kind and show me a sign that you are still with me.""
Khayanga heard her mother's voice
saying to her: ""Our child, pick up the
pieces that are left. Fetch water with
them and wash your feet. When you
finish washing, close your eyes.""
Khayanga obeyed and suddenly, the
broken Gourd became whole once
again.""Khayanga continued to carry her
Gourd everywhere she went. Wherever
she passed, people whispered to each
other, ""What type of gourd is this?""
With her special Gourd, Khayanga
received everything she needed.
""With the special Gourd, Khayanga
A knew that her parents were watching
 over her. Nothing bad could happen to
her.
""The Adventures of
SUPERCOW""This is cow. Cow is
cool!""By day, itis an
ordinary cow."Flying a kite.Kicking a ball."By night, a
supercow!"Saving lives.And fighting crime."But if you close
your eyes really
tight, and make a
wish.""Cow might come to
visit you too!"The end.Cow with one horn"Heeeee! There is a
beautiful cow at
home.""It has only one
horn, and no tail.
""    It is fat, with a big
stomach.                                                                                                                                                                           ""It is a powerful
cow.""The shepherd loves
this cow the most.""When the other
cattle graze, this
one eats alone.""See = This cow is  a

vee “== fighter. Other cows

leave it alone.""If you met such a
cow, what would
you do?"Hungry Jackal and the sour grapes"Once upon a time,
there was a hungry
jackal. He was
walking around the
bush looking for
food.""He came across a
grapevine. He
spotted a bunch of
juicy ripe grapes
hanging from a
high branch.""""Those look really
delicious,"" he
thought. He took a
few steps back so
that he could make
his highest jump.""The grapes were
too high. Jackal fell
on his back without
even touching the
bunch.""Jackal got up and
went further back
from his starting
spot. He ran, and
almost got high
enough. But he fell
even harder.""He tried again and
again. But he
couldn't get to the
grapes. He kept
falling until his
back was very sore.""Finally, he gave up
and walked away.""He stopped and
looked back at the
grapes. He was
hungrier than
ever. ""Those
grapes look really
sour anyway,"" he
thought."Monkey eats his own tail Mozambican"Once upon a time
the rabbit was a
great friend of the
monkey.""One day the rabbit
said, ""Let's go for a
walk and look for
something to eat.""
The monkey
agreed, but it was
a trap for him!""They went to a field
of maize and
started to eat it.""But the clever
rabbit had spoken
to the owners of
the farm, to catch
the monkey and
show him he was
foolish.""The clever rabbit
started shouting,
""Robbers! Robbers!
Your maize is all
gone!"" And he
jumped up and ran
away.""Suddenly the
owners appeared
and found the
monkey trying to
run away. But he
has a long tail and
it was stopping
him.""The owners
followed him,
shouting, ""Stop!
Stop! We saw you,
you are the
monkey.""""But they caught
him and started
beating him.""He couldn't stand
the pain so he said,
""I was with my
friend Rabbit. He is
the one who invited
me.""""But the owners cut
his tail off and told
him, ""Go and tell
your friend that we
cut off your tail!""""Then they went to
the rabbit's house
and cooked the
monkey's tail to
eat. The rabbit
invited the monkey
for lunch.""At the end of the
meal the rabbit
asked the monkey
if he knew what he
had eaten. The
foolish monkey
answered, ""No I
don't!""""The rabbit told him
that he had eaten
his own tail and
then ran away. And
from then on they
became enemies!"The Hornbill"As I was moving in
Bunaanga village I
found a fat
hornbill.""
The hornbill flew
into the air. But I
ran after it through
the grass.""Until it perched on
a dead tree. Then I
shot it again. This
time it fell to the
ground."I picked up the hornbill."And I gave it to Hiryagaana: one
who eats whatever he finds. (One time,
I gave him Namupongera.) He happily received
the hornbill.""The head of the
hornbill was very
big and as hard as
dg panga or
machete.""The bird had fat
like that of a sheep.
It was so
appetising!""It's not easy to find
a hornbill without
planning. At night,
hornbills roost on
dry branches. A
person eats what
he likes. That is
why Hiryagaana
eats hornbills."Why Hippos have no hair"One day, Rabbit was
walking by the riverside.""Hippo was there too,
going for a stroll and
eating some nice green
grass.""Hippo didn't see that
Rabbit was there and she
accidentally stepped on
Rabbit's foot. Rabbit
started screaming at
Hippo, ""You Hippo! Can't
you see that you're
stepping on my foot?""""Hippo apologised to
Rabbit, ""I'm so sorry. I
didn't see you. Please
forgive me!"" But Rabbit
wouldn't listen and he
shouted at Hippo, ""You did
that on purpose! Someday,
you'll see! You're going to
pay!""""Rabbit went to find Fire
and said, ""Go, burn Hippo
when she comes out of the
water to eat grass. She
stepped on me!"" Fire
answered, ""No problem,
Rabbit, my friend. I'll do
just what you ask.""""Later, Hippo was eating
grass far from the river
when, ""Whoosh!"" Fire
burst into flame. The
flames began to burn
Hippo's hair.""Hippo started to cry and
ran for the water. All her
hair was burned off by the
fire. Hippo kept crying, ""My
hair has burned in the fire!
My hair is all gone! My
beautiful hair!""""Rabbit was happy that
Hippo's hair was burned.
And to this day, for fear of
fire, the hippo never goes
far from the water.""Everyone knows
that the elephant
has avery long
nose.""But a long time
ago, the elephant's
nose was short and
fat. Like a shoe in
the middle of its
face.""One day a baby
elephant was born.
She was curious
about everything.
She had a question
for every animal.""She was curious
about Giraffe.
""Why do you have
a long neck?"" she
asked.""She was curious
about Rhino. ""Why
does your horn
have a sharp
point?""""She was curious
about Hippo. ""Why
do you have red
eyes?"" she asked.""And she was VERY
curious about
Crocodile. ""What
does Crocodile eat
for dinner?"" she
asked.""""Never ask a
question like that!""
said her mother.
Then she walked
off, frowning.""Quickly Crow flew
down to baby
elephant. ""Follow
me to the river.
There you will see
what Crocodile
eats for dinner,""
squawked Crow.""So the baby
elephant followed
Crow down to the
river.""She pushed
through the reeds
and stood on the
bank. She looked
into the water.
Where was
Crocodile?""""Hello,"" said a
stone near the river
bank. ""Hello,"" said
Baby Elephant.
""Can you tell me
what Crocodile
eats for dinner?""
she asked.""""Bend down and I
will tell you,"" said
the stone. ""Lower,
lower,"" said the
stone. So Baby
Elephant bent
down lower, and
lower.""Then suddenly, ""Snap!"" Baby
Elephant's nose was caught in
Crocodile's jaws. ""Crocodile will eat
you for dinner!""
squawked Crow,
and flew away.""Baby Elephant sat
back on her strong
legs and pulled.
She pulled, and
pulled. But
Crocodile did not
let go of her nose.""Baby Elephant's
nose stretched,
and stretched, and
stretched. Then,
""Thud!"" she fell on
her back.""Crocodile sunk
back into the
water. He was
cross about losing
his dinner.""Baby Elephant
looked at her nose.
It was stretched
very long. She
could not see
where it ended!""Her nose was so
long she could pick
fruit from high
branches.""Her nose was so
long she could
shower her back
with water. From
that day, all
elephants had long
and useful trunks.""This is Cat.
This is Dog.""Cat and Dog want to draw.
Cat and Dog want to colour.
Cat and Dog want to make art.
Dog starts.
He takes a pencil and he takes a
paper. The paper is a square.""First Dog draws an oval.
The oval is the body of Cat.
Wow, that is simple!""Then he draws two triangles on top of
the oval.
The two triangles are the ears of Cat
and he draws a black triangle in the
oval.
The black triangle is the nose of Cat
and he draws a line above the nose.""Now he draws the eyes and the
eyebrows of Cat.
The eyes are two dots.
The eyebrows are two lines.
Wow, that is easy!""Then he draws the mouth of Cat.
The mouth is a line.

It looks like the letter ‘w’ and he draws
the hairs of Cat.

Three hairs on the left side and three
hairs on the right side.""The drawing is almost finished.
He draws the arms and legs of Cat.
The arms and legs are lines and he
draws the toe of Cat.
The toes are circles and he draws the
tail of Cat.
The tail is a long line.""At last he draws some stripes on the
body of Cat and he colours the body
orange.
Then the drawing is finished.
Wow, that is beautiful!""Now it is Cat's turn.
He takes a pencil and he takes a
paper.
The paper is a rectangle.""First Cat draws an oval.
The oval is the body of Dog.

Wow, that is good!""Then he draws two black forms on top
of the oval.
The two black forms are the ears of
Dog and he draws a black circle in the
oval.
The black circle is the nose of Dog and
he draws a line above the nose.
""Now he draws the eyes and the
eyebrows of dog.

The eyes are two dots.
The eyebrows are two lines.

Wow, that is perfect!""Then he draws the mouth of Dog.
The mouth is a line.
The shape is again the letter ‘w’ and he
draws some dots around the mouth of
Dog.
Three on the left side and three on the
right side.""The drawing is almost finished.
He draws the arms and legs of Dog.
The arms and legs are lines and he
draws the toe of Dog.

The toes are circles and he draws the
tail of Dog.
The tail looks like a flower.""At last he draws some black circles on
the body of Dog and he colours the
body yellow.

Then the drawing is finished.
Wow, that is wonderful!""Bye bye Cat.
Bye bye drawing of Cat.
Bye bye Dog.

Bye bye drawing of Dog."Where is my cat?Is it under the bed?Is it inside the basket?Here it is!"Once upon a time, there
was a small boy named
Musau. He lived with his
father Syonzola.""Syonzola stayed out
drinking until very late
every night. Musau hardly
ever saw him.""When Syonzola came
home, he would scream,
""Villagers! Villagers! Come
and rescue me! Iam being
attacked by a hyena.""""On hearing Syonzola's
screams, the villagers
would come with their
arrows and spears and
machetes, to rescue him.
But they would find that
he was drunk and just
teasing them.""Syonzola continued
drinking and shouting for
help late at night. The
villagers continued going
with arrows and spears
and machetes to rescue
him. But each time it was
the same story. He would
only be teasing them.""Every time Syonzola
returned home late,
Musau would be woken by
his screams for help.
Musau knew his father's
voice very well. He would
listen as Syonzola moved
in the dark until he
reached the door of their
house.""One night, Syonzola came
home drunk as usual. But
this time, a hyena actually
hid near the house. When
Syonzola screamed, the
hyena fiercely attacked
him.""We are tired of
€ Syonzola’s tricks.
Syonzola screamed so
loudly. But the villagers
said, ""We are tired of
Syonzola's tricks."" They
turned over in their beds
and went back to sleep.""As usual, Syonzola's
screams woke up his son
Musau. On that night,
Musau listened for his
father's steps as he always
did. But his father did not
seem to move closer to the
house. Musau sat up and
listened more keenly.""""My father is really in
W 1 W 1
My father is really in danger. danger, Musau said. 
""This time he is not teasing. time he is not teasing.""
""Musau jumped up from his
bed. He grabbed a
smouldering log from the
fire and rushed out of the
hut.""""Father, father,"" he called.
In the moonlight, Musau
saw Syonzola struggling
with an animal. He raised
the burning log. When the
hyena saw the fiery log, he
ran away.""After that, Syonzola never
went out again to drink.
Instead, he spent his days
telling interesting stories
to the school children."The boy who ran away"Gemo and Nelson
were brothers.""Gemo went to
school every day,
but Nelson did not.""Their father went
to work in the
town.

Their mother
worked in the
garden.""One day his father
left some money
on the table.

Nelson took the
money!""His father was very
angry.""So Nelson ran
away.

He walked and
walked all day.""He sat under a tree
all night.""His brother Gemo
found him under
the tree, and took
him home.""""Why did you steal
the money?"" asked
his father.""""Why did you run
away?"" asked his
mother.""""Tam very, very
sorry,"" said Nelson,
and he returned
the money.""They hugged him
and were happy
again.""There was a village near a lake.
There lived a young girl.
Her name was Atieno.""Atieno's father was a
famous fisherman. He had
his own little fishing canoe.

Atieno enjoyed going
fishing with her father.""Atieno loved to watch the
boys play football.

""Let me play with you,"" she
begged them one day.

The boys laughed at her,
""Go and play hide and
seek with girls. """"Girls said to Atieno, ""Your
legs are too long."" Atieno
was sad.

Each morning, Atieno
danced alone with the sun.

The sun became her
friend.""One day, the sun did not
rise. Cocks did not crow.
Birds did not sing. Children
did not go to school. Even
her father did not go
fishing.

Atieno was sad. ""Where is
my friend, the sun? Why is
it so dark today?""""Atieno told the other
children how sad she was.
But they laughed at her,
""Perhaps your friend the
sun, is dead. Or perhaps it
ran away from you.""

Atieno said, ""The sun is my
friend. It cannot die.""""Atieno was so sad that she
ran to the house.

She kicked her brother's
ball very hard.""Atieno thought, ""I will play
with this ball until my
friend, the sun returns.""

She picked up the ball and
ran out with it.""Atieno put the ball on the
ground. She thought, ""I
can play just like those
boys.""

She kicked the ball hard. It
went up and up into the
cloudy sky.""Everybody stared up. The
ball disappeared into the
thick clouds.

There was total silence.
""Suddenly, the thick clouds
cleared. The sun
appeared. Life returned to
the village once again.

Everybody prepared to do
what they always did.""Atieno could not believe
that the sun was back in
the village. But most of all,
the sun was back in her
life.

She told the children, ""My
friend, the sun is back!""""Once upon a time there was a hyena
and a monkey.

The hyena and the monkey had an
argument. They went to a judge to
settle their differences.""After the judge listened to their case
he was afraid to pass judgement on
their case.

He thought to himself, ""If I condemn
the hyena, it will eat all my cattle. And
if I condemn the monkey, he will eat all
my corn! So, what am I to do?""""The judge thought for a while, and
said, ""The case is too difficult for me to
judge alone. You should go to the
elders of the village.""

""
After the elders listened to their case,
they were also afraid to pass
judgement.""If they supported the monkey, the
hyena might eat their cattle. If they
supported the hyena, the monkey
might eat their corn. The elders told
Hyena and Monkey that their case was
very difficult.""Suddenly, the elders remembered a
poor woman in the town. She had
nothing to lose, neither cattle nor corn.

""She can pass the judgement without
any fear,"" said the elders to one
another. They told the two animals to
go to her.""They arrived at the poor woman's
house and asked her to give them
judgement. She agreed.

But, she told them to speak to her
separately, one by one.""First the poor woman called Hyena
and said, ""You are respected, a big
animal, and a hero. How could you
quarrel with this small and miserable
monkey?""""The poor woman said to Hyena, ""If
people heard about this disagreement,
they would look down on you. Stop the
quarrel with Monkey.""

""Of course you are right,” said Hyena.
“I will drop this case. I will end the
argument.""""Then the poor woman called the
monkey and she said, ""You are smart
and pretty. Why do you argue with this
dirty, smelly animal who eats rotten
things? What will people think of you
when they hear about your argument
with this ugly creature?""

After a while Monkey said, ""You are
right! I will drop this case.""""After that, the poor woman called both
of them and said, ""You both agreed to
drop this case. So, you should forgive
each other.""""Both animals apologised to each other
and settled their dispute.

When people from the town heard this
story, they were surprised. The poor
woman solved the problem that the
judge and the elders failed to solve.
""Cat and Dog
and the Ball""This is Cat.

This is Dog.""Cat and Dog live ina
house.

A house with a door.

A house with a roof.""Cat and Dog have a ball.

The ball is red and blue
and green.""Cat and Dog play with the
ball.

Cat throws the ball to Dog.
Dog catches the ball.
Dog throws the ball to Cat.

Cat catches the ball.""Then Cat throws the ball
very high.

Oh! oh!""The ball is on the roof.

The ball is on the roof of
the house.""Cat and Dog can see the
ball.

Cat and Dog cannot get to
the ball.""Cat and Dog cry.

Then Elephant comes by.""Elephant is big.
Elephant can see the ball.

Elephant can get to the
ball.

Elephant gets the ball
from the roof.

Elephant takes the ball
from the roof of the house.""Elephant gives the ball to
Cat and Dog.

Cat and Dog smile.
Elephant smiles.

Cat and Dog and Elephant
smile.
""
Cat and Dog and Elephant
play with the ball.

Cat throws the ball to Dog.
Dog catches the ball.

Dog throws the ball to
Elephant. Elephant catches
the ball.

Elephant throws the ball to
Cat. Cat catches the ball.""Bye bye Cat.
Bye bye Dog.

Bye bye Elephant.""Prosy wanted a
pussy cat.""Prosy's family went
to visit the pussy
cats.""Prosy wanted this
cat. It was too big
for her.""Tim wanted this
kitten. It was too
small for him.""Mum wanted this
kitten. It was too
quick for her."They took them to their homes."Everyone is happy
with the new pussy
cat.""Thaimi lived in the village of
Ombalantu. One day she went with
her brother, Angula, to fetch water.
While Thaimi was filling her pot Angula
saw a hare. He ran after it. He ran and
ran and ran but the hare was too quick
for him.""Thaimi's pot was full and she was
ready to go home. She looked around
but she could not see Angula. She
walked and she walked and she
walked, looking for him. At last she
found him lying in the grass behind a
large anthill.""As she came closer Angula held his
finger to his lips. Close by a group of
strange men were resting. The men
had bows and arrows. And spears!
""Angula,"" Thaimi whispered. ""Those
men are raiders. They have come to
steal our cattle and burn our village.
Come quickly. We must run home and
warn the village."" So very quietly and
quickly Thaimi and Angula ran
towards their village.""Near their village they met their uncle.
He was taking his cow to the water.
Thaimi called out, ""Run, uncle, run!
Men are coming to steal our cattle and
burn our village."" The man shouted at
his cow and made her run towards the
village.""Further on Thaimi saw her aunt
working in the field and she called out,
""Run, aunt, run! Men are coming to
steal our cattle and burn our village!""
The woman took her hoe, picked up
her sleeping baby and ran towards the
village.""Further on Thaimi saw her
grandfather. He was limping along the
road beside a donkey loaded with
grain. And she called out, ""Run,
grandfather, run! Men are coming to
steal our cattle and burn our village!""
Her grandfather lifted his stick and
chased the donkey until it ran towards
the village.""When Thaimi and her brother reached
the village she called out to everyone,
""Run, run. Men are coming to steal our
cattle and burn our village!"" The
villagers were scared but they did not
know where to hide or what to do.
Where could they hide their cattle?
Where could they hide their grain?
Where could they hide themselves?""Thaimi was very frightened but then
she remembered the place where she
and Angula sometimes went to play. A
safe place. A secret place.""What do you think? Was it Thaimi or
the tree that saved them all at
Ombalantu?""The sprouting
bean""The root grows
first.""It grows down into
the soil.""Then the stem
grows. It grows up
towards the sun.""The first leaves
come out.""The bean plant
grows tall.""Then the flowers
come out. The
flowers turn into
beans.""There are lots of
seeds in the bean.""One day at the
river, Dog came
across some eggs
in the sand. He
asked himself,
""Which animal left
these eggs here?""""He counted ten
eggs and thought
they might belong
to Duck. He put
them in his bag.""He took the eggs
home and put
them in a warm
place.""When Dog
returned to the
river, he met
Crocodile. She
asked, ""Have you
seen my eggs?"" ""I
don't know
anything about
your eggs,"" he
replied.""Crocodile started
visiting all the
animals asking
about her eggs.""Meanwhile, the
eggs hatched one
by one.""Dog did his best to
look after the baby
crocodiles, but
there was never
enough food. The
young crocodiles
were always
hungry.""One day Crocodile
went to Dog's
house looking for
her eggs. As she
stood outside, she
heard the rumbling
of little crocodile
bellies!""Crocodile stormed
inside and hit Dog
with her tail. Dog
yelped and jumped
through the
window.""Crocodile chased
Dog all the way to
the river.
""Dog cried, ""I'm
sorry, I didn't know
they were your
eggs!""""Crocodile believed
him and forgave
him. She took her
offspring for their
first swimming
lesson.""The man who
lived alone""There was a man
who didn't want to
live close to his
neighbours. And he
also didn't want his
wife to visit the
homes of her
neighbours.""One day he went
and built a home
way out in the
bush, far from the
homes of his
neighbours.""He would go out
every day in the
morning and come
home late at night.""One night the man
was very late
getting home. A
hyena saw what
that man was
doing.""The hyena went
and knocked on
the door of the
house.""The woman,
thinking it was her
husband, opened
the door. The
hyena jumped on
her and devoured
her.""The man, when he
returned home saw
that his wife had
been eaten by a
hyena. There was
nothing he could
Say.""All this happened
because he didn't
want to live near

his neighbours.""Goat, Dog and Cow were
great friends.

One day they went ona
journey in a taxi.""They reached the end of
their journey.

The driver asked them to
pay their fares.

Cow paid her fare.""Dog paid extra, because
he did not have the correct
money.""The driver was about to
give Dog his change.

Suddenly Goat ran away
without paying.""The driver was very
annoyed.

He drove away without
giving Dog his change.""That is why, even today,
Dog runs towards a car to
peep inside.

He is looking for the driver
who owes him change.""Goat runs away from the
sound of a car.

She is afraid she will be
arrested for not paying
her fare.""
Cow is not bothered by
cars.

Cow takes her time
crossing the road.

She knows she paid her
fare in full."Crushed louse"Long time ago, there were
two young men who lost
their cows.

They looked for the cows
until it was late.""As it got dark, they saw a
light in a house.

They agreed to go and ask
for a place to sleep.""They went to the house
and knocked. The door
opened and they went in.

The young men didn't see
anyone. But they heard a
voice greeting them.""The voice said, ""I am a
louse. Open the metal pot
and have food. Open the
earthenware pot and drink
amahewu.""""Then the louse put on its
skin and went out.""The young men ate, drank,
and gave thanks.

Then they left the house.""As they left, they had a
bad thought. They said,
""No, it couldn't have
happened that we had
food from a louse.""

Eventually they agreed to
go back and crush the
louse.""They went back to the
house and crushed the
louse.

Suddenly the louse was
gone, and the house
disappeared!

They found themselves
outside in the open.""Long ago, there was a
clever cat and a foolish
dog.

The clever cat lived well in
a wealthy family's house.
The foolish dog starved on
the street.""""How is it that a wealthy
family allows you to live in
their house?"" the foolish
dog angrily asked the
clever cat.""The clever cat replied, ""I
live with people because
I'm neat and I bury my
waste. I ask for food
saying, meow.""""""If I do the same, will they
allow me to live in a
house?"" asked the dog.
The cat replied, ""Yes, do
what I have told you and
they will allow you. They
will give you food.""""The foolish dog said,
""Today, I will not hurt you.""

""He almost got me this
time. I don't want to meet
him again,"" said the cat,
jumping away.""Based on the cat's advice,
the foolish dog barked
loudly at the door of a
house.""The owners of the house
beat him with a stick.

""The cat fooled me. I will
eat her when I get her,""
shouted the foolish dog.""The owners of the house
beat him with a stick.

""The cat fooled me. I will
eat her when I get her,""
shouted the foolish dog.""""Listen dog, you can eat
me, but let me play a little
first. Just as I allow a rat to
play before I eat her,""
replied the clever cat.""The dog asked, ""How does
the rat play?""

The cat replied, ""I let it go
a little, and I tell it to count
to three. While the rat is
counting, I grab it.""""The foolish dog let the cat
go free and told her to
count to three.

The clever cat escaped and
climbed up a tree.

""Come down from the tree
and count to three,"" asked
the dog.
""The clever cat answered,
""Listen dog, you will never
get me again. I'm nota
fool.
You can count to a
hundred, a thousand or a
million but you will never
get me again!"""Sheep who got tired of city life"Sheep lived in the city. She
got tired of city life and
decided to go to the bush.

On her way she met Hyena
who had not eaten for
many days.""She greeted Hyena over
and over again, ""Brother
Hyena, how are you?
Brother Hyena, how are
you?""

Hyena answered Sheep,
""Don't greet me over and
over. Do something to end
my hunger.""""When Sheep heard this,
she started running.

Suddenly, she reached
Lion's den. Hyena was
running after her.

Hyena arrived at the den
and finally stopped,
throwing dust into Lion's
eyes.""Lion said to Hyena, ""Can't
we even find peace in our
dens? You throw dust into
our eyes!""

Hyena answered, ""King, I
did not mean to disrespect
you! Iam only running
after my food!""""Lion said, ""You are food to
me, too, Hyena. Did I
chase you? You came to
me. Don't blame me later.""""Then Lion said to Sheep,
""Why did you come to the
bush?""

Sheep replied, ""I came
because I am a diviner.""""Lion said, ""Prepare
traditional medicine to
prove that you are truly a
diviner."" Sheep replied,
""My medicine is
expensive.""

Lion said, ""That is no
problem, whatever it costs.
There is nothing that is
impossible for me.""""Sheep said, ""The medicine
is Hyena's ear.""

Lion cut off Hyena's ear
and gave it to Sheep.

Sheep put Hyena's ear
inside a jar of honey and
gave it to Lion.""
Lion ate Hyena's ear and
found it so sweet.

He asked Sheep, ""Is it
possible for me to
have the second ear?""""Sheep said, ""Yes, it is
possible my king."" So Lion
cut off Hyena's second ear
and brought it to Sheep.

Sheep put the ear inside a
jar of honey and gave it to
Lion.
""Then Lion said to Sheep,
""Is it possible to get the
skin?"" Sheep replied, ""I
think it is possible my
king.""

When Hyena heard this he
was afraid of dying, and
ran. Lion ran after him.""""If such is life in the bush,
then it is better for me to
return home,"" said Sheep.""Once upon a time, Frog
and Snake were good
friends. Their homes were
near each other and their
children played together.""One day, Frog said to
Snake, ""My friend I want to
visit my mother next week.
Would you like to go with
me?""""""IT would be happy to go,""
Snake answered.

""Very good, then let's
prepare for a long
journey,"" replied Frog. ""We
also need to find someone
to look after our homes
while we are away,"" she
added.""They asked Monkey to
help since he was good
and responsible. Monkey
accepted.""During the next few days,
the two friends were busy
making arrangements for
the journey.

Frog collected white ants
and packed them in a big
sack. Her mother loved to
eat white ants.""The day arrived and the
two friends set off at
dawn.

Soon they reached the
thick forest. As they
entered the forest, a group
of angry squirrels
gathered to attack them.""Snake was so afraid that
she started shaking. She
hissed and hissed but the
fierce squirrels kept on
coming closer.""Just as the squirrels were
about to attack them, Frog
croaked very loudly.

The squirrels got such a
fright that they ran away.""When the two friends
finally arrived at Frog's
mother's place, they were
hungry and tired.

Frog's mother gave them a
mat to sit on while she was
preparing food.""When the food was ready,
Frog and Snake washed
and sat down to eat.""Before they started eating,
Frog said, ""Snake you can't
eat while lying down. That
is bad manners. Please sit
up properly otherwise my
mother will be offended.""""Snake tried very hard to sit
up like the frogs, but she
failed.""""I can't sit up properly,""
Snake pleaded with Frog.
But Frog would not listen.""Snake was so upset that
she decided to go back to
her home. She did not say
farewell to the frogs.""On the way home, she
made a plan to teach Frog
a lesson!""Once upon a time,
Crocodile was sitting near
a big lake basking in the
sun. Ape arrived at the
water and they greeted
each other.""Ape asked where Crocodile
lived. Crocodile answered,
""T live in the lake."" Ape
was amazed. She asked
Crocodile, ""How is life in
the water? Is it good?""""Crocodile answered, ""Life
in the water is good.
Where do you live?"" Ape
answered, ""I live in the
trees. I eat fruits and
leaves. What do you eat?""""Crocodile answered, ""I eat
meat."" She was already
thinking of how to catch
Ape and eat her. She
asked Ape, ""Can you
swim?""""Ape answered, ""No, No! I
cannot swim."" Crocodile
said, ""Let me teach you
how to swim."" Ape
answered, ""No, lam not
interested.""""Crocodile lied to Ape
saying, ""We have become
friends. Do not be afraid of
me. Come, sit on my back.""
So Ape sat on Crocodile's
back and Crocodile started
swimming.""When they reached in the
middle of the lake,
Crocodile asked Ape, ""How
do you feel being in the
lake? Are you
comfortable?"" Ape
answered, ""It is interesting
and Iam happy.""""Crocodile sighed and said
to Ape, ""My uncle is very
sick. We haven't found the
medicine to treat him.""""Ape was so afraid that she
was trembling. She
wondered how she would
escape from Crocodile.""Then Ape had an idea. She
said to Crocodile, ""Do not
worry. I will give my heart
for your uncle. Ape meat
will cure him.""""Crocodile was impressed.
She said, ""Really! Would
you be willing to give your
heart for my uncle?"" Ape
answered, ""Yes of course.
We are friends!""
""A short while later, Ape
said, ""Oh! I'm really sorry
my friend. I forgot my
heart in a tree. Let's go
back so I can fetch it.""""Crocodile hesitated and
then asked, ""Are you sure?
Will you bring your heart
from the tree?"" Ape
answered, ""Yes, I will bring
it. I will even go with you to
visit your uncle.""""Crocodile agreed and
swam back to the shore of
the lake. As soon as they
reached land, Ape jumped
from Crocodile's back.""From the safety of a tree
branch, Ape called, ""Good
bye my friend, Crocodile.
Thank you for the lake
tour.""""Crocodile was angry. She
hissed, ""So, did you lie to
me? Are you coming back
with your heart?"" Ape
responded, ""I was able to
sit on your back only
because my heart was
with me!"""